{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1031\deflangfe1031{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}
{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}{\f6\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Courier;}{\f180\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f181\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}
{\f183\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f184\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f185\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f186\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}
{\f187\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f196\fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Courier New CE;}{\f197\fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Courier New Cyr;}{\f199\fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Courier New Greek;}
{\f200\fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Courier New Tur;}{\f201\fmodern\fcharset177\fprq1 Courier New (Hebrew);}{\f202\fmodern\fcharset178\fprq1 Courier New (Arabic);}{\f203\fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Courier New Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;
\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}{\s16\qj \fi340\li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 \sbasedon0 \snext16 Body Text 2;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4536\tqr\tx9072\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 \sbasedon0 \snext17 footer;}{\*\cs18 
\additive \sbasedon10 page number;}}{\info{\author Ein gesch\'e4tzter Microsoft-Kunde}{\operator Frank Schubert}{\creatim\yr1999\mo12\dy27\hr18\min43}{\revtim\yr2005\mo1\dy13\hr1\min12}{\version16}{\edmins0}{\nofpages10}{\nofwords4016}{\nofchars22892}
{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws0}{\vern8249}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1134 
\deftab708\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz425\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\hyphauto1\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow3
\jcompress\viewkind1\viewscale100\nolnhtadjtbl \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\footer \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4536\tqr\tx9072\pvpara\phmrg\posxc\posy0\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs18 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs18\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof 10}}}{\cs18 
\par }\pard \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4536\tqr\tx9072\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ELOStat - Version 1.3
\par by Dr. Frank Schubert, 01/2005
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\ul\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par Note: 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\fs20\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
This program is freeware and may be used without restrictions for all non-commercial, i.e. private or scientific purposes. If you want to publish rating lists produced by ELOStat on private web
sites or in scientific magazines you should mention the name of the program and the version number. }{\fs20\ul\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
It is also possible to use ELOStat for commercial purposes. If you want to publish rating lists produced by ELOStat on commercial websites or in magazines, 
it must be guaranteed that the database on which the rating list is based is made public if there is any need for it. The program has been validated extensively but correctness of the results produced by ELOStat ca}{
\fs20\ul\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 n}{\fs20\ul\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 not be quaranteed.   
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par 
\par }{\fs24\ul\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Description of the program:}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
ELOStat produces a comprehensive statistical evaluation of PGN databases and generates an Elo rating list similar to the swedish SSDF list. It should be used primarily for computer chess games but of course it can also be applied to \lquote human\lquote 
 chess databases. The PGN files should have been produced by a commercial chess program or database program. PGN files gene}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 r}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ated \lquote manually\lquote 
 by a text editor can cause problems if they don\rquote t comply strictly with PGN conventions.   
\par }\pard\plain \s16\qj \fi340\li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ELOStat 1.3 is a console prog
ram. To start it, it is not necessary to change to the command prompt. Just double-click on the EXE file. Exit the program by clicking the usual [X] button at the top right corner of the text window or by entering the return key.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi340\li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ELOStat can be used in thr
ee different modes. After starting the program the following menu appears:
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\f2\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ELOStat Version 1.3
\par by Dr. Frank Schubert, 01/2005
\par --------------------------
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Choose program mode:
\par 
\par (1) Rating list
\par (2) Tournament
\par (3) Single competition
\par }{\f2\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par (I)  Program mode 1: }{\fs24\ul\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Rating list
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Mode 1 is the standard mode of ELOStat. After choosing this point, three input parameters are expected from the user (represented boldface in the following). 

\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Name of pgn-file = }{\b\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 wb_elo
\par }{\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Start Elo = }{\b\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 2400
\par }{\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Minimum number of games = }{\b\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 0
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\f2\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\b\f6\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 In the first line the name of the PGN file must be given (without PGN ending!). As an exa}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 m}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
ple a winboard database of Frank Quisinky, Kai Skibbe and Christian Koch was used here. 
\par }\pard \qj \fi340\li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 It is not necessary that the database is in the same directory than the ELOStat program
. But in this case the complete path to the PGN-file must be given, e.g. \lquote c:\\chess\\data\\wb_elo\rquote . Long filenames are supported. If ELOStat cannot find the database specified by the user, an error message is given.
\par In the second input line from above the user can choose the start value of the Elo calcul}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 a}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 tion. ELOStat uses the iteration algorithm introduced by Ken Thompson. For this, all pr
}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 o}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 grams start with the same Elo value (which means that all Elo values given in the PGN header of each game are not taken i
nto account !). After that the whole database is treated as a single huge tournament and the Elo performances of each program are calculated according to ELO\rquote 
s formula. These new Elo values replace the start values. This procedure is repeated until all Elo values remain nearly constant (they are converging to a certain limit).  
\par The Elo start value doesn\rquote t influence the relative playing strengths of the programs. Ther}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 e}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
fore the Elo differences between the programs are independent of the start value. The latt
er allows an absolute calibration of a rating list if appropriate results are available. How such a calibration can be carried out is desribed below. In the present example an Elo start value of 2400 was used.
\par The third input parameter from above describes
 the minimum number of games a program must have been played in order to appear in the rating list. The standard value is zero (0) as given in the present example. Then all programs appear in the rating list. In some cases it can be necessary to exclude p
rograms with only a few number of games (e.g. N < 10) because of their very uncertain Elo rating.
\par If for example all programs with less than 10 games should not appear in the rating list, the user has to choose \lquote 10\rquote  as input parameter instead of \lquote 0\rquote  as used above. Note that this p}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 a}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
rameter only influences the outward appearance of the rating list. The statistical calculations including the iteration procedure are not concerned. In particular, all games of the excluded programs are still used to calculate the 
performances of the other programs.
\par After entering the third input parameter, the PGN database is readed and the Elo calcul}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 a}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 tion is started. In the present example the following output is produced:  
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi340\li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Reading wb_elo.pgn... 28 programs, 4674 games
\par Analysing database structure... 1 cluster(s)
\par Calculating ELO ratings... 26 iterations
\par 
\par General statistics in \rquote general.dat\rquote 
\par Individual statistics in \rquote programs.dat\rquote 
\par Rating list in \rquote rating.dat\rquote 
\par Database structure in \rquote cluster.dat\rquote 
\par 
\par CPU time = 4 sec}{\f2\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\f6\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par 
\par }{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 The lines have the following meaning: In the file \lquote wb_elo.pgn\rquote 
, ELOStat has identified 28 different programs and 4674 games. The database consists of a single coherent cluster (more details concerning the fragmentation of databases are given below). 26 iterations were nece}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 s}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
sary to finish the Elo calculation using the internal accuracy specified by the program. The results of the calculations were written to the four different data files mentioned above. They were generated in the same directory in which the ELOStat-EXE can 
be found. The comput}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 a}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 tion time was 4 seconds. 
\par }\pard \qj \fi340\li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
In the following, the results from the four data files are described in detail. The files are given in ASCII format and can be opened and processed by each simple text editor like WordPad for example. }{\fs24\ul\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 The form
atting produced by ELOStat is only preserved if the text is displayed by the COURIER NEW font}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 .  
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par 
\par The data file \lquote general.dat\rquote 
\par 
\par In this file general statistical parameters of the database can be found. In the present case its content is as follows:
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par Games        :   4674 (finished)
\par 
\par White Wins   :   1990 (42.6 %)
\par Black Wins   :   1603 (34.3 %)
\par Draws        :   1081 (23.1 %)
\par Unfinished   :      0
\par 
\par White Perf.  : 54.1 %
\par Black Perf.  : 45.9 %
\par 
\par ECO A =    599 Games (12.8 %)
\par ECO B =   1482 Games (31.7 %)
\par ECO C =   1244 Games (26.6 %)
\par ECO D =    969 Games (20.7 %)
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1040\langfe1031\langnp1040 ECO E =    380 Games ( 8.1 %)
\par }{\f6\cf1\lang1040\langfe1031\langnp1040 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1040\langfe1031\langnp1040 
\par }{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 The file gives the number of (finished) games, the number of white and black wins and draws, and the corresponding relative performances of White and Black. Moreover a coarse classif}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 i}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 cation of the games into ECO codes A-E is carried out. Furthermore, ELOStat is able to re}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 c}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
ognize unfinished games in the database. The number of these games is also given above (\lquote 0\rquote  in this case). It is pointed out that unfinished games are no
t used in any sort of statistics within the program. Therefore, all relative results given in percentages refer to the number of fi}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 n}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ished games only.
\par 
\par 
\par The data file \lquote programs.dat\rquote 
\par 
\par In this file the individual statistics of each program is given. As an example we obtain for the program AnMon:
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par (11) AnMon 4.09-4.27          : 418 (+165,=105,-148), 52.0 %
\par 
\par Ant 3.42+3.61                 :   8 (+  6,=  2,-  0), 87.5 %
\par Arasan 5.1a-5.2               :   8 (+  7,=  1,-  0), 93.8 %
\par Bionic Impakt 4.01            :   8 (+  2,=  3,-  3), 43.8 %
\par Bionic Impakt 4.11 Beta       :   8 (+  3,=  2,-  3), 50.0 %
\par Bringer 1.2-1.5 Beta          :  22 (+ 16,=  3,-  3), 79.5 %
\par Comet A95-B05                 :  22 (+  6,=  7,-  9), 43.2 %
\par Crafty 15.18-16.15            :  24 (+  5,=  4,- 15), 29.2 %
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1036\langfe1031\langnp1036 Dragon 3.11                   :   8 (+  6,=  1,-  1), 81.2 %
\par EXchess 2.45-2.51             :   8 (+  6,=  2,-  0), 87.5 %
\par Francesca 0.63-0.70           :  38 (+ 10,= 15,- 13), 46.1 %
\par Gromit 2.11x-2.20             :  38 (+ 13,=  8,- 17), 44.7 %
\par La Dame Blanche 2.0-2.0c      :   8 (+  4,=  2,-  2), 62.5 %
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 LambChop 6.9+7.1              :   8 (+  6,=  1,-  1), 81.2 %
\par LambChop 8.2                  :  12 (+  7,=  2,-  3), 66.7 %
\par Little Goliath 1.05-1.41a     :   8 (+  5,=  1,-  2), 68.8 %
\par Little Goliath 2000           :  14 (+  3,=  6,-  5), 42.9 %
\par Patzer 2.99zp-3.02            :  32 (+ 15,=  7,- 10), 57.8 %
\par Phalanx 17-21                 :  36 (+ 14,=  8,- 14), 50.0 %
\par Stobor B.36+B.56              :  12 (+  5,=  3,-  4), 54.2 %
\par The Crazy Bishop 37-43        :  14 (+  8,=  1,-  5), 60.7 %
\par }{\f2\cf1 Voyager 2.29-6.06             :  34 (+  9,=  7,- 18), 36.8 %
\par WB Nimzo 2000                 :   8 (+  2,=  2,-  4), 37.5 %
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1040\langfe1031\langnp1040 WB Nimzo 2000a                :  12 (+  1,=  5,-  6), 29.2 %
\par }{\f2\cf1 ZChess 1.2                    :   8 (+  3,=  5,-  0), 68.8 %
\par Zarkov 4.5e-4.5h              :  20 (+  3,=  7,- 10), 32.5 %
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\fs24 
\par }{\fs24 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 The first line above gives the total result of AnMon, i.e. the total number of games, the nu}{
\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 m}{\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ber of wins, draws and losses, and the corresponding total performance. After that the results against each opponent are given. 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par 
\par The data file \lquote rating.dat\rquote 
\par 
\par This file contains the most important and central result of the calculations, the rating list, a}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 r}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ranged by Elo performances:
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par     Program                    Elo    +   -   Games   Score   Av.Op.  Draws
\par 
\par  }{\f2\cf1\lang1040\langfe1031\langnp1040 1 WB Nimzo 2000a           : 2569   40  50   184    67.7 %   2440   28.8 %
\par  2 Zarkov 4.5e-4.5h         : 2538   23  30   532    66.4 %   2419   26.1 %
\par  3 Crafty 15.18-16.15       : 2500   22  26   652    62.4 %   2411   25.5 %
\par  4 Voyager 2.29-6.06        : 2477   24  25   608    58.7 %   2415   24.0 %
\par  5 WB Nimzo 2000            : 2471   38  41   250    59.6 %   2403   20.8 %
\par  }{\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 6 Comet A95-B05            : 2454   25  24   616    56.2 %   2410   24.7 %
\par  7 Little Goliath 2000      : 2446   36  31   310    55.3 %   2408   31.3 %
\par  8 Bionic Impakt 4.01       : 2437   42  40   230    56.1 %   2393   21.7 %
\par  }{\f2\cf1 9 Phalanx 17-21            : 2429   27  25   584    53.3 %   2406   19.5 %
\par 10 Patzer 2.99zp-3.02       : 2418   27  24   596    53.5 %   2393   23.5 %
\par 11 AnMon 4.09-4.27          : 2418   33  27   418    52.0 %   2403   25.1 %
\par 12 Gromit 2.11x-2.20        : 2409   25  30   524    48.6 %   2419   22.7 %
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 13 Francesca 0.63-0.70      : 2392   26  31   452    47.3 %   2410   27.0 %
\par 14 The Crazy Bishop 37-43   : 2379   28  33   416    48.0 %   2392   21.9 %
\par 15 ZChess 1.2               : 2370   48  36   208    50.2 %   2368   29.3 %
\par 16 Little Goliath 1.05-1.41a: 2364   32  37   326    47.9 %   2378   20.2 %
\par 17 Bionic Impakt 4.11 Beta  : 2357   57  54   126    40.5 %   2423   22.2 %
\par 18 LambChop 8.2             : 2352   49  43   192    39.6 %   2425   19.8 %
\par 19 Bringer 1.2-1.5 Beta     : 2336   34  30   384    40.5 %   2402   20.6 %
\par 20 Arasan 5.1a-5.2          : 2324   43  45   192    43.0 %   2373   24.5 %
\par 21 ZChess 0.92-1.0          : 2308   43  40   224    41.1 %   2370   22.3 %
\par 22 Gromit 2.0-2.1           : 2296   71  56   106    36.8 %   2389   17.0 %
\par 23 Stobor B.36+B.56         : 2264   47  36   232    33.2 %   2385   23.3 %
\par 24 Ant 3.42+3.61            : 2257   50  37   222    33.8 %   2373   20.7 %
\par 25 LambChop 6.9+7.1         : 2254   54  39   198    33.8 %   2370   19.2 %
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1036\langfe1031\langnp1036 26 Dragon 3.11              : 2206   69  37   184    27.2 %   2377   14.1 %
\par 27 EXchess 2.45-2.51        : 2195   56  30   262    25.8 %   2378   18.7 %
\par 28 La Dame Blanche 2.0-2.0c : 2120   94  45   120    23.3 %   2326   13.3 %
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f6\fs24\lang1036\langfe1031\langnp1036 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 The separate columns give the (mean) Elo performance, the + and }{\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
{\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 45 \\f "Symbol" \\s 12}{\fldrslt\f3\fs24}}}{\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033  margins of error given with 95 % confidence, the number of finished gam
es, the relative score given in percentages, the average opponent Elo and finally, the relative number of draws for each program.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi397\li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 EloStat 1.3 uses a resampling technique called nonparametric ABC (approximated boo}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 t}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 strap conf}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 i}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 dence) to calculate the confiden
ce bounds. For details see Efron und Tibshirani (An introdu}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 c}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 tion to the Bootstrap, Chapman Hall, New York, 1993). }{\fs24 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par 
\par The data file \lquote cluster.dat\rquote 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 The efficiency of the iteration algorithm described above is based on the fact that an indirect relation betwe
en the playing strengths of two different programs exists even if the two pr}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 o}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
grams have not played against each other. If for example program A plays some games against program B and B plays some games against C, this would be enough to guarantee the conve
rgence of the three Elo performances of each program by using the iteration procedure. A, B, and C form a single coherent cluster. The database \lquote wb_elo.pgn\rquote 
 consists of only one cluster. That means, taking an arbitrary program of the database as a starting
 point, a playing strength relation to all other programs exists in the sense given above. Each well-structured database should consist of one coherent program cluster and therefore should be unfra}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 g}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 mented (in the ideal case all programs have been played against each other program).
\par }\pard \qj \fi340\li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 If a database consists of a large number of games played between many programs, the d}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 a}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 tabase can become fragmented, i.e. it is decomposed into independent clusters with no rel}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 a}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
tion in playing strength between them. This case appe
ars if for example additionally to the programs A, B, and C, three further programs are added which played against each other (D-E, D-F, E-F) but not against the other programs. In this case the database consists, strictly speaking, of two independent dat
abases. Concerning the Elo calculation, two independent iteration procedures take place and there is no relation between the Elo performances calc}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 u}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
lated in each cluster. ELOStat identifies fragmented databases and shows the different pr}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 o}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 grams and the number of games played within each cluster. 
\par In the present example only one cluster exists. If we would add a new competition, let\rquote s say, between Fritz and Nimzo to the database, two independent clusters would exist because Fritz and Nimzo only played against e
ach other but not against the other programs. In this case the data file \lquote cluster.dat\rquote  would look like this: 
\par 
\par }{\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Cluster No. 1:
\par 
\par AnMon 4.09-4.27                (25)
\par Ant 3.42+3.61                  (24)
\par Arasan 5.1a-5.2                (23)
\par Bionic Impakt 4.01             (22)
\par Bionic Impakt 4.11 Beta        (15)
\par Bringer 1.2-1.5 Beta           (24)
\par Comet A95-B05                  (26)
\par Crafty 15.18-16.15             (26)
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1036\langfe1031\langnp1036 Dragon 3.11                    (22)
\par EXchess 2.45-2.51              (24)
\par Francesca 0.63-0.70            (25)
\par Gromit 2.11x-2.20              (26)
\par La Dame Blanche 2.0-2.0c       (15)
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 LambChop 6.9+7.1               (23)
\par LambChop 8.2                   (18)
\par Little Goliath 1.05-1.41a      (23)
\par Little Goliath 2000            (23)
\par Patzer 2.99zp-3.02             (27)
\par Phalanx 17-21                  (26)
\par Stobor B.36+B.56               (23)
\par The Crazy Bishop 37-43         (27)
\par }{\f2\cf1 Voyager 2.29-6.06              (24)
\par WB Nimzo 2000                  (22)
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1040\langfe1031\langnp1040 WB Nimzo 2000a                 (13)
\par }{\f2\cf1 ZChess 1.2                     (24)
\par Zarkov 4.5e-4.5h               (24)
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ZChess 0.92-1.0                (12)
\par Gromit 2.0-2.1                 (8)
\par 
\par 28 programs, 4674 games
\par 
\par }{\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 itoffset = -0.796822
\par 
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par 
\par Cluster No. 2:
\par 
\par Fritz 6.68                     (1)
\par Nimzo 7.32                     (1)
\par 
\par 2 programs, 20 games
\par 
\par }{\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 itoffset = -0.000000
\par 
\par }{\f6\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 For each cluster, the number of programs and the number of finished games is given. Add}{
\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 i}{\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 tionally in parenthesis the number of knots, i.e. the number of different opponents for each program can be found.   
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi340\li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 If more than
 one cluster exists, individual rating lists for each cluster are generated and written to the data file \lquote rating.dat\rquote 
. Fragmented databases can easily be defragmented if a competition between one of the programs of the first cluster and one of the programs
 of the other cluster is carried out (e.g. Fritz against AnMon). This would be enough to re-establish a relation in playing strengths between the two clusters and therefore to produce an individual cluster with only one individual rating list (but in this
 case the relation between both clusters would be very weak). In general a high degree of connection between the programs should exist. The ideal case is reached if each program has played against each other program (e.g. in round robin tournaments). 

\par The data file \lquote cluster.dat\rquote  also contains the value of the so called iteration offset (itoffset). This is a special characteristic of the iteration algorithm, which normally is not of great inte}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 r}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 est for practical purposes. Nevertheless it is described here shortly: In order to guarantee the convergence of the iteration procedure, after each iteration the average value of all Elo pe}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 r}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 formances (weighted by the individual number of games played by each program) must be equal to the Elo start value. Due to the nonli
nearity between the relative performance (in %) and the corresponding Elo value (more exactly: Elo difference), a constant offset appears that must be added after each iteration in order to guarantee a constant mean Elo value.     
\par This offset leads to the situation that the Av.Op. Elo given in the rating list is different from the value obtained by taking the average Elo values from the first column. This diffe}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 r}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ence exactly corresponds to the iteration offset explained above. Or in other words: The Elo per
formance of each program in the rating list is itoffset times higher than can be expected from its relative performance and its Av.Op. value. This systematic offset is valid for all pr}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 o}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 grams in a same manner. Therefore, the Elo differences between the prog
rams, i.e. the relative playing strengths are not affected by the iteration offset. In most cases the value of itoffset is smaller than 1 Elo point, but in some cases it can amount to 50 points and more.   
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\fs24\ul\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 The calibration of the rating list}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 :
\par 
\par The rating list produced by ELOStat can be calibrated if an absolute Elo value for one pr}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 o}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
gram is available from other sources, e.g. SSDF or official tournament results. Suppose we would know the absolute rating of Comet, let\rquote s say 2420 Elo points. If we now look at
 the rating list above which was generated by using a start value of 2400, we see an Elo rating for Comet of 2454, which means a difference of \endash 
34 Elo points. Therefore the iteration procedure must be repeated by using a start value being 34 points smaller than the first value of 2400, i.e. 2366 Elo points. After that the following calibrated rating list is produced: 
\par 
\par }{\f2\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033    Program                    Elo    +   -   Games   Score   Av.Op.  Draws
\par 
\par  }{\f2\cf1\lang1040\langfe1031\langnp1040 1 WB Nimzo 2000a           : 2535   40  50   184    67.7 %   2406   28.8 %
\par  2 Zarkov 4.5e-4.5h         : 2504   23  30   532    66.4 %   2385   26.1 %
\par  3 Crafty 15.18-16.15       : 2466   22  26   652    62.4 %   2377   25.5 %
\par  4 Voyager 2.29-6.06        : 2443   24  25   608    58.7 %   2381   24.0 %
\par  5 WB Nimzo 2000            : 2437   38  41   250    59.6 %   2369   20.8 %
\par  }{\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 6 Comet A95-B05            : 2420   25  24   616    56.2 %   2376   24.7 %
\par  7 Little Goliath 2000      : 2412   36  31   310    55.3 %   2374   31.3 %
\par  8 Bionic Impakt 4.01       : 2403   42  40   230    56.1 %   2359   21.7 %
\par  }{\f2\cf1 9 Phalanx 17-21            : 2395   27  25   584    53.3 %   2372   19.5 %
\par 10 Patzer 2.99zp-3.02       : 2384   27  24   596    53.5 %   2359   23.5 %
\par 11 AnMon 4.09-4.27          : 2384   33  27   418    52.0 %   2369   25.1 %
\par 12 Gromit 2.11x-2.20        : 2375   25  30   524    48.6 %   2385   22.7 %
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 13 Francesca 0.63-0.70      : 2358   26  31   452    47.3 %   2376   27.0 %
\par 14 The Crazy Bishop 37-43   : 2345   28  33   416    48.0 %   2358   21.9 %
\par 15 ZChess 1.2               : 2336   48  36   208    50.2 %   2334   29.3 %
\par 16 Little Goliath 1.05-1.41a: 2330   32  37   326    47.9 %   2344   20.2 %
\par 17 Bionic Impakt 4.11 Beta  : 2323   57  54   126    40.5 %   2389   22.2 %
\par 18 LambChop 8.2             : 2318   49  43   192    39.6 %   2391   19.8 %
\par 19 Bringer 1.2-1.5 Beta     : 2302   34  30   384    40.5 %   2368   20.6 %
\par 20 Arasan 5.1a-5.2          : 2290   43  45   192    43.0 %   2339   24.5 %
\par 21 ZChess 0.92-1.0          : 2274   43  40   224    41.1 %   2336   22.3 %
\par 22 Gromit 2.0-2.1           : 2262   71  56   106    36.8 %   2355   17.0 %
\par 23 Stobor B.36+B.56         : 2230   47  36   232    33.2 %   2351   23.3 %
\par 24 Ant 3.42+3.61            : 2223   50  37   222    33.8 %   2339   20.7 %
\par 25 LambChop 6.9+7.1         : 2220   54  39   198    33.8 %   2336   19.2 %
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1036\langfe1031\langnp1036 26 Dragon 3.11              : 2172   69  37   184    27.2 %   2343   14.1 %
\par 27 EXchess 2.45-2.51        : 2161   56  30   262    25.8 %   2344   18.7 %
\par 28 La Dame Blanche 2.0-2.0c : 2086   94  45   120    23.3 %   2292   13.3 %
\par }{\f6\cf1\lang1036\langfe1031\langnp1036 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1036\langfe1031\langnp1036 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 One can observe that the relative differences between the programs didn\rquote 
t change but all Elo ratings decreased by 34 points. If the calibration value of Comet would be greater than 2454, the start value must be increased instead.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\fs24\lang1036\langfe1031\langnp1036 (II) Program mode 2: }{\fs24\ul\lang1036\langfe1031\langnp1036 Tournament
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
If using tournament databases it can be necessary to arrange the rating list by the score, or more general, by the relative performances (given in %). This is only convenient if all pr}{\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 o}{\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
grams played the same number of games. Othe
rwise ELOStat produces a warning message but continues to calculate the rating list. Besides the minimum number of games which is not needed here, the input and calculation procedure is similar to program mode 1. In the follo}{
\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 w}{\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ing example a winboard database of Christian Koch has been used:
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\f2\fs24\ul\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ELOStat Version 1.3
\par by Dr. Frank Schubert, 01/2005
\par --------------------------
\par 
\par Choose program mode:
\par 
\par (1) Rating list
\par (2) Tournament
\par (3) Single competition
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Name of pgn-file = }{\b\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 koch
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Start Elo = }{\b\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 2400
\par 
\par }{\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Reading koch.pgn... 13 programs, 1560 games
\par Analysing database structure... 1 cluster(s)
\par Calculating ELO ratings... 17 iterations
\par 
\par General statistics in \rquote general.dat\rquote 
\par Single statistics in \rquote programs.dat\rquote 
\par Rating list in \rquote rating.dat\rquote 
\par Database structure in \rquote cluster.dat\rquote 
\par 
\par CPU time = 2 sec}{\f2\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par 
\par The output of the results given in the data files \lquote general.dat\rquote , \lquote programs.dat\rquote  und \lquote cluster.dat\rquote  is also similar to program mode 1. Only the form of the rating list changes:
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f6\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\f2\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par    Program                     Score     %    Av.Op.  Elo    +   -    Draws
\par 
\par  1 Crafty 16.06           : 192.0/240  80.0   2381   2623   30  67   19.2 %
\par  2 WB Nimzo 2000          : 166.0/240  69.2   2389   2531   34  59   10.8 %
\par  3 The Crazy Bishop 0043  : 152.0/240  63.3   2393   2489   37  45   20.8 %
\par  4 L. Goliath Gold 1.0-2.0: 144.5/240  60.2   2394   2468   38  46   14.6 %
\par  5 Comet A.96-B.01        : 140.0/240  58.3   2395   2455   39  44   15.8 %
\par  6 Gromit 2.10-2.13       : 135.0/240  56.2   2397   2441   41  38   25.0 %
\par  7 Phalanx 21             : 135.0/240  56.2   2397   2441   41  44   12.5 %
\par  8 ZChess 1.00-1.20       : 124.0/240  51.7   2399   2412   44  41   13.3 %
\par  9 Arasan 5.0b            : 120.5/240  50.2   2400   2403   45  37   18.8 %
\par 10 JRCP 0.34              :  68.5/240  28.5   2412   2254   60  33   12.9 %
\par 11 La Dame Blanche 2.0c   :  66.5/240  27.7   2413   2247   63  32   11.2 %
\par 12 Fortress 1.52          :  58.0/240  24.2   2415   2218   69  31   11.7 %
\par 13 InmiChess 2.15         :  58.0/240  24.2   2415   2218   71  31   10.0 %
\par }{\f6\cf1\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par The meaning of the values given in the different columns is self-explanatory. A tie breaking in the case where two programs have the same performance (e.g. useful in Swiss Tourn}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 a}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ments) is not realized in the current version of ELOStat.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par 
\par (III) Program mode 3: }{\fs24\ul\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Single competition
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Besides the automatic analysis of PGN databases, ELOStat is able to calculate the Elo stati}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 s}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 tics of a single competition between two programs directly, if the number of wins, draws and losses is known. After choosing program mode 3 the following input (represented boldface) must be given by the user:
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ELOStat Version 1.3
\par by Dr. Frank Schubert, 01/2005
\par --------------------------
\par 
\par Choose program mode:
\par 
\par (1) Rating list
\par (2) Tournament
\par (3) Single competition
\par 
\par 
\par Wins = }{\b\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 12
\par }{\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Draws = }{\b\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 6}{\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par Losses = }{\b\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 2}{\f2\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\f2\lang1040\langfe1031\langnp1040 Av.Op. Elo = }{\b\f2\lang1040\langfe1031\langnp1040 2400
\par }{\b\f6\fs24\lang1040\langfe1031\langnp1040 
\par }{\fs24\lang1040\langfe1031\langnp1040 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 After that the following output is produced:}{\f6\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f6\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\f2\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\f2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 Result     : 15.0/20 (+12,=6,-2) 
\par Perf.      : 75.0 %
\par Margins    :
\par  }{\f2 68 %      : (+  6.7,-  8.4 %) -> [ 66.6, 81.7 %]
\par  95 %      : (+ 12.6,- 17.5 %) -> [ 57.5, 87.6 %]
\par  99.7 %    : (+ 17.9,- 28.5 %) -> [ 46.5, 92.9 %]
\par 
\par Elo        : 2591
\par Margins    :
\par  68 %      : (+ 69,- 71) -> [2520,2660]
\par  95 %      : (+148,-138) -> [2453,2739]
\par  99.7 %    : (+256,-215) -> [2375,2846]
\par 
\par New calculation (y/n) ?
\par }{\f2\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 According to that, 15 points out of 20 games have been reached. Moreover t
he error margins are given with 68 %, 95 % and 99.7 % confidence. Normally the 95 % confidence interval is used. To give an example, the following conclusions can be drawn from the results above: The (mean) performance amounts to 75 % with a 95% error of 
+12.6 % and \endash 17.5%, respe}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 c}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 tively. Therefore, with a probability of 95 % the \lquote true\rquote  relative performance lies between 57.5 and 87.6
 %. The corresponding average Elo performance is 2591 with 95% errors of +148 and \_138, respectively. Consequently, with a probability of 95 % the \lquote true\rquote  Elo performance is between 2453 and 2739 points. 
\par }\pard \qj \fi340\li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 After finishing a calculation the user can either start a new calculation or can quit the pr}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 o}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 gram.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par }{\fs24\ul\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Concluding remarks}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 :
\par 
\par The statistical theory on which ELOStat is based is described in two articles in the german computer chess magazin CSS (Computerschach und Spiele, Issues 1 and 2/2000). The calc}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 u}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 lation of confidence bounds using nonparametric ABC has been introduced in Version 1.3. It produces much better results than the original method. More details about ABC can be found in Efron and Tibshiranis textbook 
\'84An introduction to the Bootstrap\'93, Chapman Hall, New York, 1993, or in an article by DiCiccio and Efron, \'84Bootstrap Confidence Intervals\'93, Statist}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 i}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 cal Sc}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 i}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 ence, Vol. 11, No. 3, 189-228, 1996.   
\par }\pard \qj \fi340\li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 Following this theory, the Elo rating corresponding to a relative performance of 100\~% or 0\~% is indefinite. Due to mathematical reasons (e.g. 
to guarantee the feasibility of the iteration procedure) ELOStat assigns to those programs a finite Elo value which is exactly 600 points smaller (0 % perf.) or greater (100 % perf.) than the Av.Op. Elo. Or in other words: ELOStat does not support Elo dif
ferences greater than }{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 177 \\f "Symbol" \\s 12}{\fldrslt\f3\fs24}}}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033  600 points (therefore the 95% error margins can be at most }{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 177 \\f "Symbol" \\s 12}{\fldrslt\f3\fs24}}}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033  1200 points). For nearly all practical purposes, this restriction does not play any important role. 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
\par In very rare cases ELOStat produces an error message stating that the 
iteration procedure failed and that no convergence of the Elo mean value could have been reached within the maximum number of iterations specified by the program. This problem only appears when many programs in the database are characterized by 0 % or 100
 % results. In these cases the iteration procedure is slowed down significantly so that the Elo calculation takes a much longer time as usual. 
\par 
\par The main assumption of the iteration procedure is that the average playing strength of a chess program does not 
change from one game to another, or in other words, that the mean playing strength is the same for all games in the database. This condition is only fulfilled approx}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 i}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 
mately if no extensive book learning against opponents takes place. For human databases the iteration algorithm is less suitable because human players can increase their rating signif}{\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 i}{
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1031\langnp1033 cantly even during very short periods. Therefore for human players the FIDE or USCF rating system should be prefered.
\par 
\par The current version of ELOStat is limited to 1000 different programs/players. There are no principal restrictions concerning the number of games.
\par 
\par The commercially available chess programs of the ChessBase family (Fritz, Hiarcs, Junior, Nimzo) also use the iteration procedure to generate a so calle
d Elo start list. Obviously the current implementation of this function does not work correctly. Therefore please avoid any questions to the author concerning differences in the results between Fritz & Co. and ELOStat (thanks).
\par 
\par In the ELOStat package you will find the file \lquote ELOStat.his\rquote  which documents all changes in the program compared to older versions.
\par 
\par The current version of ELOStat 1.3 was tested extensively. Nevertheless bugs are possible. If you found such a bug or if you have suggestions for further improvements of the program please email to 
\par 
\par Frank_Schubert@t-online.de
\par 
\par If you send a bug report please attach the PGN database that produces the error. Of course it will be treated confidentially. Thanks in advance. 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\fs24 Frank Schubert, Dresden, Germany, January 13, 2003.   }{\f6 
\par }{
\par }}